---
follows: data/d09_2019.md

id: "litvis"
---

@import "../css/aoc.less"

# Day 9 (2019): Sensor Boost

'Part One' and 'Part Two' puzzle descriptions and puzzle input from [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/2019/day/9)

## Part 1

The additions required for the [intcode computer](intcode.md) are relatively easy to implement as we are using a dictionary to store memory addresses. This means we do not need to have contiguous memory addresses for the computer to function.

We need to add a state (via a `.relativeBase` element of the record storing the computer's state) holding the current relative base offset. We also need to handle the new opcode 9 representing a shift to the relative base offset.

The main effort in the intcode computer redesign is in accounting for the difference between position mode and relative mode.

With the new intcode computer, running the program is simple:

```elm {l r}
part1 : Int
part1 =
    puzzleInput
        |> initComputer [ 1 ]
        |> runProg
        |> .out
```

---

## Part 2

As with part 1, once the intcode computer has been modified to accommodate relative mode, running the BOOST diagnostic check program is as normal:

```elm {l r}
part2 : Int
part2 =
    puzzleInput
        |> initComputer [ 2 ]
        |> runProg
        |> .out
```

---

## Reflection

When I first saw this puzzle, I was pleased as the architecture of the intcode computer allowed non-contiguous memory addressing. Keeping its state as a record also made extending it quite simple.

What caught me out were the subtleties of when to apply relative mode and when not. Although I had a general parameter interpretation function that could account for mode, there was a need to treat some output parameters differently to others. As a consequence, debugging took longer than I had hoped. This was complicated by the fact my error in forgetting to account for relative mode in the opcode 9 (relative base shift) output, meant the diagnostic BOOST program was incorrectly reporting a `203` error. Once I had fixed opcode 9, it then correctly identified two further errors in the `less` and `equals` output addressing, which were easier to spot and correct.

The lesson learned here (and one I should really know already as a programmer) is not to take error messages at face value.
