---
follows: data/d01_2015.md

id: "litvis"
---

@import "../css/aoc.less"

# Day 1 (2015): Not Quite Lisp

{( part1|}

Santa is trying to deliver presents in a large apartment building, but he can't find the right floor - the directions he got are a little confusing. He starts on the ground floor (floor 0) and then follows the instructions one character at a time.

An opening parenthesis, (, means he should go up one floor, and a closing parenthesis, ), means he should go down one floor.

The apartment building is very tall, and the basement is very deep; he will never find the top or bottom floors.

For example:

- (()) and ()() both result in floor 0.
- ((( and (()(()( both result in floor 3.
- ))((((( also results in floor 3.
- ()) and ))( both result in floor -1 (the first basement level).
- ))) and )())()) both result in floor -3.

To what floor do the instructions take Santa?

{| part1 )}

We can change a given floor depending on the symbol:

```elm {l}
moveFloor : Char -> Int -> Int
moveFloor instruction floor =
    if instruction == '(' then
        floor + 1

    else
        floor - 1
```

And then simply apply this function to each symbol in the input text:

```elm {l m}
part1 : Int
part1 =
    puzzleInput |> String.toList |> List.foldl moveFloor 0
```

{( part2 |}

Now, given the same instructions, find the position of the first character that causes him to enter the basement (floor -1). The first character in the instructions has position 1, the second character has position 2, and so on.

For example:

- ) causes him to enter the basement at character position 1.
- ()()) causes him to enter the basement at character position 5.

What is the position of the character that causes Santa to first enter the basement?

{| part2 )}

Similar to part one, but this time we create a list of floor positions and find the first instance of floor -1.

```elm {l r}
part2 : Int
part2 =
    puzzleInput |> String.toList |> scanl moveFloor 0 |> indexOf -1
```
