---
follows: data/d10_2015.md

id: "litvis"
---

@import "../css/aoc.less"

# Day 10 (2015): Elves Look, Elves Say

'Part One' and 'Part Two' puzzle descriptions and puzzle input from [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/2015/day/10):

{( part1|}

Today, the Elves are playing a game called look-and-say. They take turns making sequences by reading aloud the previous sequence and using that reading as the next sequence. For example, 211 is read as "one two, two ones", which becomes 1221 (1 2, 2 1s).

Look-and-say sequences are generated iteratively, using the previous value as input for the next step. For each step, take the previous value, and replace each run of digits (like 111) with the number of digits (3) followed by the digit itself (1).

For example:

- 1 becomes 11 (1 copy of digit 1).
- 11 becomes 21 (2 copies of digit 1).
- 21 becomes 1211 (one 2 followed by one 1).
- 1211 becomes 111221 (one 1, one 2, and two 1s).
- 111221 becomes 312211 (three 1s, two 2s, and one 1).

Starting with the digits in your puzzle input, apply this process 40 times. What is the length of the result?

{| part1 )}

Text decoding looks like a job for regex, so let's create a regular expression for replacing a 'look' with a 'say'.
The search regex says match as many repeated digits as exist in a consecutive sequence.
The replace function counts the number of repeats and adds the digit that is being repeated.

```elm {l}
say : String -> String
say =
    AOC.replaceFn "(\\d)\\1*"
        (\m -> (String.length m.match |> String.fromInt) ++ String.left 1 m.match)
```

We can iteratively apply the replace as many times as required by the question before measuring its length:

```elm {l r}
part1 : Int
part1 =
    AOC.iterate 40 puzzleInput say |> String.length
```

{( part2 |}

Neat, right? You might also enjoy hearing [John Conway talking about this sequence](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ea7lJkEhytA) (that's Conway of Conway's Game of Life fame).

Now, starting again with the digits in your puzzle input, apply this process 50 times. What is the length of the new result?

{| part2 )}

This just requires changing the number of iterations, noting that the size grows non-linearly with the number of iterations.

```elm {l r}
part2 : Int
part2 =
    AOC.iterate 50 puzzleInput say |> String.length
```
