---
follows: data/d20_2015.md

id: "litvis"
---

@import "../css/aoc.less"

# Day 20 (2015): Infinite Elves and Infinite Houses

'Part One' and 'Part Two' puzzle descriptions and puzzle input from [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/2015/day/20):

{( part1|}

To keep the Elves busy, Santa has them deliver some presents by hand, door-to-door. He sends them down a street with infinite houses numbered sequentially: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on.

Each Elf is assigned a number, too, and delivers presents to houses based on that number:

The first Elf (number 1) delivers presents to every house: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ....
The second Elf (number 2) delivers presents to every second house: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, ....
Elf number 3 delivers presents to every third house: 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, ....
There are infinitely many Elves, numbered starting with 1. Each Elf delivers presents equal to ten times his or her number at each house.

So, the first nine houses on the street end up like this:

    House 1 got 10 presents.
    House 2 got 30 presents.
    House 3 got 40 presents.
    House 4 got 70 presents.
    House 5 got 60 presents.
    House 6 got 120 presents.
    House 7 got 80 presents.
    House 8 got 150 presents.
    House 9 got 130 presents.

The first house gets 10 presents: it is visited only by Elf 1, which delivers 1 \* 10 = 10 presents. The fourth house gets 70 presents, because it is visited by Elves 1, 2, and 4, for a total of 10 + 20 + 40 = 70 presents.

What is the lowest house number of the house to get at least as many presents as the number in your puzzle input?

{| part1 )}

## Approach

This is a fairly straightforward number theory problem as each house receives (10x) the sum of the number of factors (calculable from [aoc.md](aoc.md)) of its house number:

```elm {l}
numPresents : Int -> Int
numPresents houseNum =
    10 * (factors houseNum |> List.sum)
```

We can traverse the infinite houses, stopping only when the number of presents exceeds the puzzle input:

```elm {l}
firstHouse : Int -> Int
firstHouse houseNum =
    if numPresents houseNum >= puzzleInput then
        houseNum

    else
        firstHouse (houseNum + 1)
```

Traversing from house number 1 finds the answer, although it would be possible to reduce calculation time by finding the lower bound, using [Robin's inequality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divisor_function#Growth_rate) as the start number (assuming house number is at least 5040).

```elm {l r}
part1 : Int
part1 =
    firstHouse 1
```

{( part2 |}

The Elves decide they don't want to visit an infinite number of houses. Instead, each Elf will stop after delivering presents to 50 houses. To make up for it, they decide to deliver presents equal to eleven times their number at each house.

With these changes, what is the new lowest house number of the house to get at least as many presents as the number in your puzzle input?

{| part2 )}

## Approach

A similar approach can be adopted here with the addition of limiting factors to those that are no more than _house number \* 50_.

```elm {l}
firstHousePt2 : Int -> Int
firstHousePt2 houseNum =
    if numPresentsPt2 houseNum >= puzzleInput then
        houseNum

    else
        firstHousePt2 (houseNum + 1)


numPresentsPt2 : Int -> Int
numPresentsPt2 houseNum =
    11 * (factors houseNum |> List.filter (\n -> houseNum <= n * 50) |> List.sum)
```

```elm {l r}
part2 : Int
part2 =
    firstHousePt2 1
```
