---
follows: data/d01_2020.md

id: "litvis"
---

@import "../css/aoc.less"

# Day 1 (2020): Report Repair

'Part One' and 'Part Two' puzzle descriptions and puzzle input from [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/2020/day/1):

{( part1|}

The Elves in accounting just need you to fix your expense report (your puzzle input); apparently, something isn't quite adding up.

Specifically, they need you to find the two entries that sum to 2020 and then multiply those two numbers together.

For example, suppose your expense report contained the following:

1721
979
366
299
675
1456

In this list, the two entries that sum to 2020 are 1721 and 299. Multiplying them together produces 1721 \* 299 = 514579, so the correct answer is **514579**.

Of course, your expense report is much larger. **Find the two entries that sum to 2020; what do you get if you multiply them together?**

{| part1 )}

## Approach

The input is sufficiently small that we could select all pairwise combinations from a list, before choosing the pair that sum to 2020. Conveniently [AOC.utilities](../examples/aocExamples.md#combinations) has a _choose k from n_ combinations function which we can apply here quite simply.

```elm {l}
product2020 : Int -> List Int -> List Int
product2020 k =
    AOC.combinations k
        >> List.filter (List.sum >> (==) 2020)
        >> List.map List.product
```

But just to keep the combination list down to a manageable size, we could remove all values that when added to the smallest input, exceed 2020 before choosing combinations:

```elm {l}
filteredInput : Int -> List Int -> List Int
filteredInput n xs =
    let
        minVal =
            List.sort xs |> List.take n |> List.sum
    in
    List.filter (\x -> x + minVal <= 2020) xs
```

```elm {l r}
part1 : List Int
part1 =
    puzzleInput
        |> filteredInput 1
        |> product2020 2
```

{( part2 |}

The Elves in accounting are thankful for your help; one of them even offers you a starfish coin they had left over from a past vacation. They offer you a second one if you can find three numbers in your expense report that meet the same criteria.

Using the above example again, the three entries that sum to 2020 are 979, 366, and 675. Multiplying them together produces the answer, **241861950**.

In your expense report, **what is the product of the three entries that sum to 2020?**

{| part2 )}

Here we just choose combinations of size k=3, this time pre-filtering the list removing values that when added to the smallest two numbers, exceed 2020:

```elm {l r}
part2 : List Int
part2 =
    puzzleInput
        |> filteredInput 2
        |> product2020 3
```

---

## Reflection

As ever, day 1 is largely a warm-up exercise with simple input parsing and straight forward application of some list processing functions. Because we have seen various combination generation tasks in previous AoCs, I was able to use my previously written [combinations function](../examples/aocExamples.md#combinations).

Nice that this puzzle provides practice in some optimisation but does not require it.
